I talk about how there is no such thing
as passive investing a lot um more than
I should because it annoys a lot of
people but there's a lot of people who
demonize passive investing I think for
kind of phony reasons and a big part of
that is this fact that you know the
reason I talk about and try to quantify
the global financial asset portfolio is
because I was trying to create a
benchmark for if we were going to define
something as passive as you know truly
passive to me is you're buying the full
market portfolio you're not devi
mediating at all. You're not making any
active decisions at all. And so when you
quantify the GFAP, you can actually
create a benchmark there where you
understand, okay, well, this is the only
if you were truly fully 100% passive,
this is the only thing you would own.
Everyone's active and you know, there's
very smart ways to be active and there's
very stupid ways to be active. And I
would say that you know a lot of the
things the most sort of disconcerting
thing that I see going on these days is
that I see the issuance of a lot of
strategies and especially with the rise
of crypto there's a lot of things going
on that I would describe as stupid
active where people are more having like
a gambling mentality approaching all of
this than anything else.
Hello and welcome to another episode of
the OddLotss podcast. I'm Joe Wisenthal.
>> And I'm Tracy Aloway.
>> Tracy, I know like everyone is like
really into what's the hot stock these
days? Nvidia, how do I play the AI boom?
It's interesting. You can make a lot of
money, get the right stocks. I love the
general topic though of just like
optimal portfolio construction. It seems
like a fascinating puzzle to me, how to
fit different types of assets together
in one coherent thing. It always felt to
me like a study in behavioral science
almost because I think
>> everyone always says, you know, just
invest in an index fund or maybe 6040.
Although, as we saw in 2022, that has
its own problems and we can talk about
that.
>> But I think this is like the one area in
people's lives where they actually crave
complexity, right? Like it doesn't sound
right to be like just put your money in
an index fund and forget about I know
it's like the simple it's like the
simplest investing strategy is the
hardest. Yeah.
>> For people it's really hard though like
when you see people making life-changing
amount of money because like oh I was in
you know SanDisk right and suddenly
everyone wants memory to for because of
AI and they're up 500% in a year it's
like damn you know like I'm really happy
with my 12% a year that I've been making
but I'm really it's really hard.
>> I was 100% invested in a leveraged Doge
ETF. Right. Yeah. Right. Like if you did
that and then you retired the next day,
I'd be like really annoyed. I'd be like
really upset. But uh but it is a fun
puzzle. You mentioned 2022 and we saw of
course um what we've seen really since
co what we've really seen since uh the
worst inflation in 40 years is that some
of these uh portfolio constructions that
work very well for a very long time
particularly anything that sort of
resembles that 6040 thing um which just
works so beautifully in the 2010s but
even before it hasn't worked as well
>> I think you're still doing fairly well
but yeah so it gets The question is
like, well, uh, I remember we asked Bill
Gross, why even own bonds at a time.
>> He was like, well, don't.
>> Yeah, he don't. He's like, I'm in I'm in
pipelines. That's where, uh, that's
where I'm getting my or I'm in whatever
ML MP MLPS or whatever. That's where I'm
getting my yield. But yeah, I think
there's some real question about like
why own treasuries, why own whatever,
etc.
>> Well, the other thing is timing. Like
this is the thing that everyone has to
consider, right? So in 2022, if you were
about to take out a big chunk of your
portfolio to buy a house or if you were
a retiree and you needed to make some
chunky payment, you were really really
unlucky in 2022 if you were if you had
taken everyone's advice and invested in
a 6040 portfolio. So this is the other
thing like you can try to smooth out
returns, but your own spending is going
to go up and down quite a bit. There's
one other issue that I think a lot about
with sort of the very standard um and it
sort of relates exactly to this with the
sort of standard advice. So in theory
it's like we're not supposed to time the
market, buy the highs, you buy the lows,
etc.
>> 2020 was a great time to buy. March 2020
would have been a fantastic time to buy.
The problem is layoffs surged and
there's this sort of phenomenon where
often the best times to invest in the
market are when you don't have a job and
you don't have money and actually
>> yeah they always say don't sell don't
panic sell at the bottom
>> there's a good chance that's when you
might need to sell that's maybe when you
lose your job or something so I'm the
the ability to sort of mechanically
actually follow the rules is per setting
aside behavioral stuff just the ability
to like have the income or have the
ability to like hold through draw downs
buy the dips, etc. may not even be
possible.
>> Absolutely.
>> Well, anyway, I'm excited to say we
really do have the perfect guest.
Someone we've had on the podcast before.
Also, someone we've just known for a
very long time. One of the most
interesting thinkers in the realms of
sort of investing and portfolio managing
and so forth. A voice of sanity, I would
say, uh, which is very rare these days.
Uh, we're going to be speaking with
Cullen Ro. He is the founder of
Discipline Funds and he is the author of
a brand new book called Your Perfect
Portfolio about exactly this topic. So,
uh, Colin, thank you so much for, uh,
coming back on the podcast. It's nice to
see you.
>> So, nice to be here.
>> What Why'd you write this book? Um,
well, this is a problem that I've always
run into throughout running my business
is that I I think as the portfolio
manager and financial adviser, I've run
into this issue where I'm trying to
construct a a model portfolio that is
ideal for my business so that I can
easily implement something and then kind
of just plug and play it into client
portfolios. And what I've realized over
the course of managing money for, you
know, however long it's been now,
multiple decades, is that everyone's
different and everyone needs their own
level of customization. And so it's very
hard to just take a model portfolio and
then plug and play. And the, you know,
the kind of funny thing with the
financial services industry is it's
largely built around these ideas that
you take a product and then you sell it
to the client. And often times what I
find is that when you're trying to sell
the product to the client, it just
doesn't mesh with their needs. And so
everyone needs to find their own perfect
portfolio. So the book isn't titled the
perfect portfolio. And the purpose of
the book really is to what I do is I go
through a number of sort of famous
portfolios and some of them are very
boring and some of them are more
sophisticated. But the overarching ethos
of the book is that you have to sort of
understand all these different
approaches and then you can plug and
play the way that you want to build your
own perfect portfolio so that it works
for you.
>> One thing I'm curious about cuz um I've
never had a professional financial
adviser or anything, but how do you
actually evaluate your client's needs?
Like what do those questions look like?
I imagine you know there probably a lot
of finances involved but are there
questions like how do you feel about
losing 40% of your portfolio in a single
year on
>> that's actually that's my fa my very
favorite question it's the question I
hate the most because for I don't know
20 years I used to print out these phony
risk profile questionnaires and I would
send them to people and one of the
questions is always you know how do you
respond to a market that falls 30 or 40%
and literally
98%
of people will answer that question the
exact same way because they know the
right answer. They'll say, "Oh, I stay
the course. I I will buy the dip or
whatever." And then COVID happens and
>> you know 50% of my clients are calling
me like this has never happened before.
What the hell do we do now? This is
terrifying. We need to sell everything,
right? And I'm there, you know, and and
even I'm looking at that and I'm kind of
like, you know, cuz in the throws of it.
Yeah,
>> that's the hard part about investing
into a bare market, especially when it's
actually going on, it all feels
rational. It
>> feels justified.
>> Totally. And you're looking at it. One
of my favorite charts in the book is a
chart of the Great Depression downturn.
And it shows this like horrific 80%
downturn where the market just went down
like every month for basically three or
four years and it goes down a full 80%.
And when you're in the throws of that
sort of 30 or 40% downturn that we saw
say during the GFC or during COVID,
you're thinking to yourself, well, wait
a minute. I know that this the market
has gone down 60 70 80% in the past. So,
if we're at 40, that means we probably
have another, you know, 40% haircut or
coming coming down the line. And so,
that's the psychology of it when people
are actually in the middle of it. And
yet I remember it vividly during COVID
because even people like Buffett and
Bill Gates like some of the the most
practical thinkers in the world they're
sitting around they're saying this has
never happened before we've never seen
this no one living has seen what is
going on right now and so it all feels
rational and then you know so from a
risk profiling perspective it's really
difficult because that sort of
subjective nature of it all is really
sort of irrelevant because when you're
actually in it all will feel totally
rational.
>> Now, I remember thinking that even like
obviously April of last year during um
the brief but very sharp selloff uh
after liberation day
>> and it's like well Trump just changed
the rules of capitalism. This is going
to be different. This is really
different. or going back to co like the
like yeah we all say we're going to uh
just hold through the downturn but in
that moment we're like oh no this is
really this is this is not like the
other sell this is different this is not
like where there was just an
overvaluation this is not like 1991 when
we had a fed engineered recession this
is something different the old rules
about buying and holding must not apply
this
>> yeah it's funny you know I see a lot of
people get mocked a lot of the analysts
back then were you know they were
changing their estimates and they kind
of, you know, after the the tariffs more
or less got scrapped, they then, you
know, upped their their estimates for
the year end targets. And in retrospect,
that looks kind of stupid. But in the
throws of it, if you remember, like they
were saying they were going to replace
the income tax. And like I'm writing,
you know, they're doing the math on
that. I'm like, wait a minute, that's a
$2.5 trillion corporate in uh tax
increase. Like that's a gigantic number,
a incredibly frightening number if it's
true. And then, you know, of course, the
CEOs of Home Depot and Target and all
them walk into the White House and are
like, "Do not do this." And so, they're
still doing the tariffs and they're
still impactful and there's still a
corporate tax and whatnot, but they're
not nearly the size that, you know, they
were going to be, you know, they were
claiming to be. And so,
>> the that frightening moment where, you
know, they announced that, you know, got
quickly scrapped in, you know, when they
uh when they were kind of reversed
course on it. I feel like we should note
here that we're recording on January 8th
and we are expecting the Supreme Court
to make a decision on some of the
tariffs. So, it the entire game could
change again.
>> Change again. Yeah.
>> Uh you mentioned the Great Depression
and one thing I thought was really
interesting in the book is you talk
about how no one really quite knows the
origins of the 6040 portfolio even
though it's become fairly standard in
finance. But you trace it back to the
Great Depression. So tell us how you did
that.
>> Yeah. Well, I don't know if I did do it
correctly, but it was kind of a guess,
but you I found that so fascinating that
6040 is arguably the most famous
portfolio of all the portfolios, and we
all probably own something that kind of
looks like 6040 at some point in our
lives. And it was actually Cory
Hoffstein from um um who uh manages the
return stacking ETFs that he asked on
Twitter one day, where did this thing
come from? And there were hundreds of
responses and none of them seemed right.
And so I just had so happened to be
writing the book at this time and I'm
writing the chapter on 6040. And I
started digging into it and I found this
story about this guy named Walter Morgan
who's running a fund called the
Wellington Fund. And Wellington Fund
obviously you know famous because it
turns into a Vanguard fund later is run
by John Bogle um who some people may
have heard of. And he's doing this
though in a very unusual way back in the
depression where during the depression
equity investing was kind of the
dominant way to actually allocate
assets. And Morgan had been burned
before that. And so he goes into the
Great Depression. He launches the
Wellington fund right before the
depression, but he does something really
unusual. He adds a huge chunk of bonds
to the portfolio. And the thing gets
crushed in the depression, but it gets
crushed way less than everything else
got crushed. And so then all of these
research analysts are starting to look
at, you know, kind of, you know, picking
through the dust of the Great Depression
and the returns there and they're
noticing that, hey, this fund did really
well in a relative sense. And so
Morgan's fund kind of takes off because
of this because the relative performance
was so good. And then the story is
interesting because then Walter Morgan
hires John Bogle. Vogle runs the
Wellington fund through um you know the
the fund goes through the the World War
II and the the boom of the 1960s and
then the scary inflation of the 1970s.
Bogle actually does something really
weird. He turns the fund closer into
like an 8020 fund kind of chasing
performance and which was sort of like
antithetical to everything that Bogle
ultimately is kind of known for
>> and then we all know the story from
there. the 6040 from 1980 to, you know,
present day has been, you know, kind of
like one of the best performing
portfolios ever. So, it's, you know,
through all of these trials and
tribulations though, this portfolio has
done incredibly well and I traced its
origin mostly back to the Great
Depression and the way that Wellington
fund was sort of built as the first real
balanced index fund. Let's actually zoom
out or back up a little bit and talk
theory because you said that many of us
or most of us will have some portfolio
that is 6040ish but that there's going
to be various modifications and people
are going to want a slug of real estate
or commodities whatever but what do you
talk about maybe from the academic
perspective like what is the 6040
portfolio really is and like what is it
theoretically achieved that has given it
this sort of it's Lindy this sort of
enduring effect that it accomplishes
goal. Talk to us about like why from the
perspective of a planner maybe it's not
perfect for everyone but it has certain
qualities that this is a good portfolio.
>> To me the 6040 is like the good enough
portfolio.
>> So just to be just to define it. So a
6040 portfolio means basically 60%
equities and 40% treasuries. Exactly.
Okay. But talk about why it's good
enough. What is what are the properties
of it? So, it's a portfolio that by
owning 60% stocks, you will you'll do
well enough you'll capture enough of an
equity market bull market and also
conversely during a bare market because
of the 40% bond slice, you typically
will buffer the equity volatility in the
portfolio just enough that you won't
capture all of the downside. And so,
it's it is balanced in this way that it
it doesn't capture all of the upside or
all of the downside and kind of can help
you stay the course. I talked
specifically in one chapter about
something called the global financial
asset portfolio and okay I really like
understanding this portfolio especially
from like a theoretical perspective
because the most interesting thing about
it actually is that nobody owns this
portfolio because it's mostly
uninvestable or you can't fully invest
it and it's actually you know I talked
to a lot of famous researchers about
this topic when I was researching the
book and
>> they all kind of concluded that the
screwiest part about actually
quantifying that portfolio is that it's
actually really controversial how to
quantify it because all of the assets in
that portfolio are not investable. So
for instance like China AS shares are
not necessarily investable for foreign
investors and there's lots of assets
that are held by you know the Swiss
National Bank owns a lot of assets that
make the assets then uninvestable and so
you know the Fed has been buying a lot
of Treasury bonds. So technically you
could say, you know, what happens to the
market cap of outstanding bonds when the
Fed is the owner of a lot of these
bonds? And you can start getting into
these sort of very academic theoretical
debates about, well, what is the market
portfolio and what's actually investable
versus uninvestable? And it's especially
interesting from like a a theoretical
>> and in theory that portfolio includes
like gas stations in Burma, right?
>> Yeah. If you Well, God, if you go into
all of the assets, you know, I did
financial assets only. So I I kind of
excluded all the non-financial assets.
So things cuz then then the whole
portfolio kind of turns into a real
estate portfolio. It's basically
everybody's houses is everything that we
own. But from a financial asset
perspective, it was really interesting
because especially when you look at
things like the full cap versus the free
float, which is basically the the actual
assets you can invest in versus the
portfolio that is actually the issuance
of outstanding financial assets. These
portfolios are really different and like
for instance in today's environment the
outstanding market cap of of stocks
versus bonds is roughly 6535 and when
you look at the sorry the equity market
when you look at the the US versus
foreign it's 65 versus 35 but when you
look at the actual issuance the full cap
it's almost the opposite
>> and so the US is way smaller from a full
issuance perspective but from a an
actual investable perspective the US is,
you know, what we call like this
extraordinary market, this unusual huge
part of the the full market cap. And
which is weird to think of because when
Vanguard and some of these big index
funds create these products, they have
to issue what is investable. They can't
just say theoretically, like I sometimes
will tell my clients, well, hey, if you
want to actually own the true market cap
portfolio or the market issuance
portfolio, you should actually be closer
to like 40% US. you should be
underweight the US market versus foreign
in this environment because that
actually is representative of the full
issuance. Whereas if you're vanguard and
you're running this index and you have
to buy what is actually been issued,
it's almost the exact opposite and you
we're way overweight US. You get into
these interesting sort of like
theoretical debates about how do you
even do this in the first place.
>> I want to talk more about illquid assets
like real estate because for most people
this is their biggest investment, right?
Their actual house. But before I do, you
just reminded me um gold. So in the book
you talk about gold as like one of the
true uncorrelated assets, but of course
over the course of last year it looks
like a momentum stock, right? How how
are you judging gold at this moment in
time?
uh you know, gold and commodities are
really hard to compartmentalize in the
the portfolio construction process
because I typically think of commodities
in general as they're just they roughly
track inflation because they are just
cost inputs and you know corporate you
know costs and so they should roughly
reflect something close historically to
the rate of inflation which is pretty
close to what the data shows. Gold is a
really screwy one because gold has this
whole other element to it where there is
huge swaths of the population that view
gold as money even though you know in a
modern monetary system you could argue
that gold is actually a pretty terrible
form of money just because it's
impractical to use for the most part. So
it's it's got this store of value and
this sort of I refer to it as a faith
put inside of it where its price almost
gets like a premium because it's not
just an input and you know cost inputs.
It is something that people believe in
that people hold and people have demand
for because it's got this other strange
use. And so it's weird in the context of
today's environment. Another concept I
talk about is I I talk a lot about time
in the the book about how important it
is to think about portfolios and asset
performance across time horizons. And
you know, I do a lot of asset liability
matching and that basically entails
working with somebody where I'm
quantifying liabilities and expenses
over time horizons and I'm matching
assets and not dissimilar way to like a
maybe a big pension fund would or banks
might operate and that's all about
understanding time and an asset
liability mismatch and if you get that
wrong you end up like Silicon Valley
Bank and
>> which you talk about in the book.
>> Yeah. And the interesting thing about
even like a retail investor, you know,
and it it took me for, you know, two
decades working in the business to
realize this that the better way to go
through a risk profiling process is not
to ask people phony questions about the
subjective nature of how they feel in a
bare market or something like that. It's
figuring out it's solving that asset
liability mismatch because what happens
to an investor when they go through a
bare market is they're realizing that
they own too much of I refer to equities
as long duration instruments.
Corporations are very long-term entities
by design, by function. And when someone
owns a 100% stock portfolio and they go
through a big bare market, what happens
to them is they're if they get scared,
they're realizing, I don't have enough
safe assets to make me feel comfortable
with this. So, if they own the 40% slice
like the 60/40, maybe they feel more
comfortable. Or if they own, you know,
there's a whole chapter on what I call
the T- bill and chill portfolio, which
is like the liquid reserve portfolio.
>> You know, I heard a story. I don't know
if it's true. Yeah. Um, uh, speaking of
T, Bill and Chill though, uh, I don't
know if it's true, but because I heard
the secondhand someone was telling me
there was like some famous like very
very successful trader like Goldman
Sachs who was like trading commodities
pulling down millions and millions of
dollars each year and he just like had
all his money in T bill. Look, look, I I
don't need like my I I make a ton of
money. I just like basically want to
save it. I don't know if that's even
true, but I do wonder. So when we were
talking about alternate ways of
assessing risk profile, do you think
about like try to get a sense of the
client's income volatility? So like
maybe someone who you know a federal
judge who is going to have a job for
life etc and a guaranteed pension maybe
they don't make a ton of money but you
are very confident that you could
predict their income for the next 50
years maybe. whereas someone who makes a
lot of money but they're like a real
estate developer in Miami and the odds
of those guys going broke every 10 years
is pretty high etc. Talk to us about
like sort of that role of calculating
expected income.
>> It's arguably I would say the most
important part of the whole equation
because one of the things I talk about
in the book is I frame your human
capital and your income as a literal
fixed income allocation. So, I almost
like to think of your income and your
job as like a bond allocation. And so,
in the context of like, you know,
someone like you're talking about or
let's use an even simpler example of
someone who's, you know, 25 and they
make a decent amount of money, that
person not only has a really long time
horizon, but if they've got a really
stable job, they've got this embedded
fixed income allocation that maybe they
don't actually quantify it like that on
a, you know, portfolio statement,
>> but that has a net present value that
job.
>> Exactly. Yeah.
>> You know, so if it the really simple
example is if you make a h 100red grand
a year and you you could almost think of
that as I've got a million dollar bond
that earns 10% a year. And what that
does, especially if it's a very stable
fixed income, it frees up a huge amount
of behavioral bandwidth for you to take
other risks. And that's one of the
arguments why if you're 25 and you've
got, you know, 40 years to retirement or
whatever and you've got a stable, you
know, solid income, well, you can think
of your your income versus your balance
sheet as being super stable, which
allows you to take a lot of risk with
your balance sheet that you might not
otherwise have. And that's another thing
I talk a lot about retirement planning
in the book because the thing that I've
seen very front and center is that when
people get close to 65 that income issue
becomes hugely important because people
start to realize that oh crap that fixed
income allocation that I've had all
these years it's about to just disappear
overnight or it's about to shrink down
to whatever your social security income
is or whatever. And so people go through
this sort of psychological mind trip
where when they near retirement and then
enter retirement, they struggle with
that, you know, adapting to this big big
change in their income because they're
realizing that, hey, I don't have this
fixed income that I could fall back on
for the last 40 years.
>> Is investing time horizon more important
than macro? Because in the book, you do
talk about the importance of macro. Um,
but on the other hand, if people are
reacting to a changing economy all the
time, then that looks a a lot like what
you're not supposed to do, right?
>> Yeah. I mean, gosh, I generally in my
practice, I am constantly trying to
downplay macroeconics
and things like that. I mean, it's
funny. You know, the reason that I
probably even know you guys is because
I've written so much about macroecon.
I'm not an economist, but people, I
think, sometimes think of me as a macro
thinker in large part because I've spent
so much of my career fielding bad
questions about, you know, hey, is the
US government going bankrupt or, you
know, what is going on with China? And
I'm trying to sort of write about this
stuff not because it's important in the
the you know the context of portfolio
construction but because it's more so
about understanding how these things
operate at more of a sort of a first
principles level where you can you can
look at a bond allocation if you own a
huge slug of you know US treasury bonds
for instance or T bills you know you can
look at these things when you understand
them more mechanically you can look at
these things and say okay well the odds
of the US government actually going
bankrupt are extraordinarily low because
I understand how these things function.
I understand that the the US government
is not going to run out of money. Um I
understand that, you know, maybe bond
vigilantes aren't quite as powerful as
we've, you know, all been told. And you
can understand these things in the
context of owning something so that
you're more comfortable with what you're
doing. And that's that's actually the
hardest part about all of this is that
it's all very complex and it's all very
emotional. And if you don't understand
what you own, then you won't be
comfortable with it and you won't stick
with it.
>> I bought a house in 2016. I think it's
done all right. But then sometimes I'm
like, man, I really wish I just put that
all into QQQ or something like that. Um,
and then the other thing with houses
that I think is interesting, which is
like you could look at maybe let's say
you own a house outright and it's like,
oh, this is worth a million dollars or
something like that. You can't really
sell it because then you have to buy a
house. And so it's like I'm not even
sure like I got to live somewhere. And
so you I don't you can't monetize that
to the same degree you could uh you know
sell your stock and buy stuff. But talk
to us about how one should think let's
start this. How one should think about
the role of their home in their overall
portfolio.
>> It it's the hardest asset to buy I think
because it is it's an instrument that
you want to generate a return on. So you
want to do like some financial analysis
on it and you know try to you nobody
wants to buy a house in you know 2007 or
something and then see it go down 30%.
But also your house is
>> where you live. It's where you're going
to raise your kids and you're going to
eat most of your meals and where you're
going to do all the little boring things
in life that are actually really
important to you. And so there's this
really personal part of it that it makes
the to some degree it throws all the
financial math out the window. But from
a basic, you know, first of all, going
back to your 2016 purchase, I would say,
you know, that was unbelievable timing
because
>> Oh, thank you.
>> the
>> Thank you.
>> the the you could argue that going
through COVID, I mean, any house that
was leveraged, did you have a mortgage?
>> Yeah.
>> Yeah. So, any house that was leveraged
was the best inflation hedge,
>> right? maybe maybe the best inflation
hedge trade of the last 50 years you
could argue just in terms of just
providing this stable level of certainty
you know the low mortgage is an
inflation hedge the you got 50% price
appreciation or probably something like
that so but that's interesting too to
think about that when you know kind of
going back to the the question on gold
that I didn't fully answer what happens
when an asset goes up so much in the
short term the way I like to think of it
at least is that let's say that housing
typically generates a a low real return
or you know even historically it hasn't
generated a real return. The way that I
like to think about things like that or
environments where you get these what I
call a price compression you get a huge
boom in an asset class and it's it's
almost easier to think of this in like a
fixed income market where like when the
when the bond market goes down a lot
interest rates go up the math completely
changes on all that. So a lot of people
these days are saying like bonds are
dead and I would say like no bonds are
actually probably more attractive
because mathematically from a yield
perspective relative to the falling
price decline the the future returns are
much more stable now much more probable.
And so what happens in an environment
where you get a 50% increase in real
estate or a you know what was gold up
last year 65%. You know let's say that
let's just be generous and say gold is
going to continue to do 8% per year for
the next you know however many years.
When you get 65% of that return all
crunched down into one year, I think
what happens is you create a higher
probability of what a financial adviser
would call sequence of returns risk,
which means that the probability that
the future returns are going to be much
more volatile becomes much higher. And
so that's one thing with real estate is
that like I'm not super optimistic about
future real estate prices for now
because we went through this big boom.
it creates this price compression and
you get lots of returns into one year
all crammed up and that means that the
likelihood of either sideways or sort of
um you know not great returns is is
pretty probable. So you know going
forward um you know I think that it's
it's good to think of your house as
basically a it's a block of commodities
on an appreciating piece of land. And
you know the thing that's important with
real estate is I I talk about this a lot
in the book that you have to think of
everything in terms of real real
returns. And that means you have to back
out inflation and you have to back out
all the other costs. And that's the
thing that, you know, I I have probably
the worst housing story in the world
because in 2017 I bought a house in
California that had a small waterway on
it. And without knowing that, which I
should have probably known in the state
of California, um, anything with water
on it in the state of California is
basically the biggest permitting
nightmare that you could possibly
imagine. It gets the EPA involved. It
gets the Coastal Commission involved. It
gets the state department of fish and
wildlife involved. And all of a sudden,
you get an introspective look at, you
know, how all these government agencies
work together.
>> And now I'm really curious. What were
you trying to do?
>> We were literally just trying to remodel
the house. Yeah. So, we bought this old
>> You weren't touching the water at all.
>> No, we weren't touching the water at
all. And in fact, the the water is not
even I mean, San Diego gets 10 inches of
rain a year. So, you know, that's very,
very little rain. And so this waterway
we call it is really it's only has water
in it I mean 10 days a year or
something. It's crazy. It's dry. It's
not like it's a lagoon or something for
a while.
>> This is how you're a libertarian arc.
>> Well, it's really funny cuz my my wife
is very very liberal and we were going
through the permitting process and she
was like these people are trying to turn
me into a libertarian.
>> I know. I get it. Oh, actually, since
you brought up your wife, I got to ask.
Uh, there's there's a bit in the book
where you talk about marrying a
portfolio and then you have a tiny
footnote that says, "Apologies to my
wife." And then it says, "I'm just
testing if my wife actually reads this."
>> Did she read it?
>> She caught it. She She actually was the
first editor of the book, so she and she
did go through it and she caught it. She
didn't just jam it all through GPT,
which she she kept trying to convince me
to do. Um, but no, it's funny. There's
another footnote about my mother-in-law
in there that um she has not caught yet.
>> Oh, what's what's that one? I didn't see
that one.
>> So, she got trapped with us during COVID
and uh I make the joke that I had just
had my first daughter right after CO and
you know the the shutdown happens, the
international travel shutdown happens.
She lives in France, so she was just
happened to be visiting us for the the
baby's arrival and she gets trapped with
us for six months. said I'd make this
joke about how I was crying in the
shower every morning,
>> not because of the baby,
>> screaming into a sock. I think you said,
>> just going back to bonds for a second,
it is true that, you know, you see
investors behave in exactly the opposite
way that they should be behaving when it
comes to bonds. If you like bonds at a
2% yield, you should love them at like a
7% yield,
>> right? What you're talking about just
now with gold and real estate is a
momentum factor, right? and momentum
seems to have done very very well over
the past few years. I mean, this is why
we say flows before pros, right?
>> Can we just follow what everyone else is
doing? That seems to be the way now.
>> Yeah. I gosh, I mean, there's there's
momentum. There's the momentum factor
and the momentum factor and this is the
more academic version of you know
portfolio construction where in the the
factor investing chapter I talk very
specifically about you know it's called
cross-sectional momentum basically and
this is basically picking the stocks
that have performed well in the past
with the expectation that they continue
to perform well in the future and they
they weirdly the the data actually shows
that that is a thing and so it it
frustrates people like Gene FMA um of
the efficient market hypothesis. But
it's it's interesting because in the
context of today's world that momentum
factor is basically just everything tech
everything that's performed the best and
so you're which has you know weirdly
continued to work and work and work
throughout the years. And so
>> you get this like self-reinforcing
cycle, right?
>> Yeah. And there's also, you know, the
the one chapter that I actually thought
was almost even more interesting than
the momentum one is one that's related,
which is called the trend following
chapter. And that is very different in
the sense that these guys, these traders
are they're not necessarily just looking
at the past and trying to, you know,
they're not picking stocks necessarily
and then extrapolating it into the
future. These guys are just trying to
find trends and they're looking maybe
they're looking at you know chart data
or whatever but and they're it's a go
anywhere strategy. So one of the most
interesting things about this strategy
is that it is one of the truly fully
uncorrelated strategies to everything
else. And it's had this
>> sort of big resurgence in the last it
became very popular after the GFC
because it it beat the pants off of
everything and was uncorrelated had
these huge asymmetric returns and then
went through this period of like a
10-year lag and it had kind of like what
I was referring to earlier where you had
this like you had that price compression
the the trend following things all went
up all these CTA funds go up you know 50
100% and then they all lag for and they
lag for a long time and that's the thing
about finding uncorrelated assets is
that sometimes these uncorrelated
instruments, they're not like cash flow
generating instruments like stocks and
bonds necessarily. So the the trend
followers though they go through this
10-year period of lagging and which
exposes people to all these behavioral
biases.
>> I remember CTAs also became a really
convenient scapegoat for anything weird
that was happening in the market. They
were like uh the multistrats of today,
right? I forgot how much we used to talk
about CTAs in the early 2010s as an
important driver. Actually, can we talk
a little bit about tech stocks for a
second because this strikes me as very
important and I think about this all the
time. You know, you see these surveys
that Bank of America does of fund
managers like what's the most crowded
trade in the world? Tech. They've been
saying that since like 2013, you know,
and it still just performs. And all
these other there all kinds of other
knock-on things, you know. It's like
people talk about US verse international
exposure, but at the end of the day,
this is sort of just a bet on tech when
we're talking about the US. And the
other thing I think about tech a lot is
that setting aside sort of theories of
portfolio construction, these companies
make gobs of money and they make more
and more and more and more each year.
You know, we recently did an episode and
Ben Snder, the top equity strategist at
uh gold of Goldman was on. He's like,
well, the big tech companies it's like
33% of S&P 500 earnings. And I listened
to that as like well that's another 67%
of to learnings for them to gobble up.
But it strikes me that like can you just
talk like it must drive portfolio
managers crazy that there is this one
sector and you know this is a novelty
right because these are big companies
that are growing faster than almost
anyone else which is not the case in
many environments when we associate big
companies with maturity and slow growth.
So like there is this thing going on for
years and years and years that just sort
of feels to bust every other strategy.
And if you're not overweight tech,
you're probably underperforming.
>> Yeah. And it's really it's frustrated
the hell out of people, especially the
the factor investors who haven't been in
the momentum trade who have been more
valueoriented or you know the people who
know that small has outperformed large
in the long run like it's all been
flipped on its head. So I again going
back to the the time horizon thing. The
way that at least I try to think about
this is tech and growth is really
interesting in the current environment
because and going back to the NASDAQ
bubble you can actually you know a lot
of people make that correlary. And the
interesting thing about the NASDAQ
bubble is that if you bought the very
tippy top of the NASDAQ bubble and held
on to today you've made like 8% per year
>> which is great. you've done really
really well, which is crazy, but you had
this crazy sequence of returns risk
because especially in real terms, you
went through this traumatic like 15-year
downturn over that period. But the so
the interesting thing, you know,
compared to then is that like you said,
these entities are completely different.
Like everybody was expecting the the
internet to be a big thing and it was
and everybody expects AI to be a big
thing and I think it will be. But the
interesting difference between that
environment and this environment is that
these companies are they make more money
than any entities have ever in human
existence. So this is completely
different than the
>> every year they beat analyst expert.
>> It's crazy and they're growing crazy
crazy fast. So it's almost unbelievable.
But the the thing is kind of going back
to that whole idea of like price
compression and thinking about time
horizons. The way I think about it is
that and I write about this specifically
in in probably my favorite chapter to
write in this book was an original
strategy that I call the forward cap
portfolio. And what I did was I took
five huge macroeconomic trends and I
distilled them all down and I try to
extrapolate data out into the future.
And one of the big ones is tech where I
look at something like uh e-commerce
retail sales and I say, you know, this
is currently whatever it is 25% of all
e-commerce retail sales uh as a
percentage of of total retail sales.
It's 25%. And that number, you know, is
probably going to go to 50 or 60 or 70%
at some point in the future. All retail
sales will just turn into e-commerce
sales at some point. like you said like
you know this is there's 75% more for
e-commerce tobble up.
>> I believe that.
>> And so if you believe that and you want
to buy technology well what should you
own? Should you own the market cap
waiting of 35% like it is now in the S&P
500 or should you go to like 50 or 60%.
And the way I kind of frame it in the
book is it's skating to where the puck
maybe is going rather than when you buy
a market cap weighted index fund. What
you're doing is you're basically skating
with the puck, which is it's a good
strategy. It works really well, but
you're not necessarily trying to skate
to where the puck is going.
>> And so I'm doing a lot of guesswork.
It's obviously very active and you know
there's a lot of there's a lot of
estimates that are involved in all of
this. But if you think forward, like I
don't think it's unreasonable to say
that in 40 or 50 years, the market cap
of technology in the S&P 500 might be 50
60 70%. Who knows? Like everything's
probably turning into a a tech.
>> But the tricky part about that is that
when especially when valuations are
really high, I I talk about how
valuations are the equivalent of high
expectations. And when expectations are
really high, it doesn't take much to
disappoint. And so your your margin for
error when expectations are really high
is just really low. And so what that
does is it causes this potential where
you have higher sequence of returns risk
in the short term where you know I would
say if I'm talking to, you know, a
20-year-old who's coming out of college,
he just got a great job on Wall Street
or something. I might tell him, well,
hey, your your time horizon is so long
and you could be so aggressive, you
should maybe just go buy a growth fund
and just, you know, lose the password to
your brokerage account for like 40
years.
>> Yeah.
>> And open it up and you'll probably have
done really well. But if you look at
that thing in five years, it might be
down 50%. You don't know. And so that's
the way I kind of frame it. And so if
you're if you're very timesensitive, I
would say, you know, the the retiree who
is retiring next year and they're loaded
to the gills with Nvidia and Google and
Microsoft. That person has a totally
different risk exposure than that
20-year-old does.
>> How do you think about the index
providers in this equation? Because you
know there's this perception you put
your money in an index fund it's a
passive investment but actually it's
kind of active because the index
provider is making decisions about what
to do. And I know the index providers
always say they're just holding up a
mirror to the market but you know some
of that seems very subjective to me like
whether or not you're going to add
Chinese bonds into a debt index and
things like that. Are are we just
outsourcing our investment decisions to
the indexes
>> to a large degree? Yeah. I mean, I I
talk about how there is no such thing as
passive investing a lot um more than I
should because it annoys a lot of
people. But there's a lot of people who
demonize passive investing, I think, for
kind of phony reasons. And a big part of
that is this fact that you know the
reason I talk about and try to quantify
the global financial asset portfolio is
because I was trying to create a
benchmark for if we were going to define
something as passive as you know truly
passive to me is you're buying the full
market portfolio. You're not deviating
at all. You're not making any active
decisions at all. And so when you
quantify the GFAP, you can actually
create a benchmark there where you
understand, okay, well this is the only
if you were truly fully 100% passive,
this is the only thing you would own.
And the funny thing is nobody can buy
this thing and nobody does buy this
thing because even at a stock bond
waiting the the stock versus bond
waiting right now is something like 45
55. So you're you're inherently
underweight stock. So it's not even that
close to even like the 6040 portfolio.
And so everybody deviates from this. And
I write about how that's totally fine.
There's nothing wrong with deviating.
There's nothing wrong with being a
little bit active. And so even from the
indexing perspective though, like I
laugh at like the, you know, the way the
S&P 500 is constructed. It's a it's a
committee of people that are constantly
picking and choosing which firms to
introduce. And it's very methodical.
It's, you know, very data dependent. So
it's a very systematic sort of process,
but at the end of the day, they're
choosing the 500 companies that go into
that index in the first place. And so,
you know, in the context of the global
equity market, it's even more
interesting because they're excluding,
you know, thousands of other entities
just, you know, by their own valition.
So, everyone's active and, you know,
there's very smart ways to be active and
there's very stupid ways to be active.
And I would say that you know a lot of
the things the most sort of
disconcerting thing that I see going on
these days is that I see the issuance of
a lot of strategies and especially with
the rise of crypto there's a lot of
things going on that I would describe as
stupid active where people are more
having like a gambling mentality
approaching all of this than anything
else. If we had like another hour
actually, I would love to just pick your
brain about the investment advisory
business like less the portfolio
construction per se and just how this
world works because I have so many
questions about that. But I have one and
you know we've seen you we run into you
every once in a while down at the future
proof conference in uh uh Southern
California and um you know or there's a
lot of adviserss and then there's a lot
of vendors and they're selling various
products and one of the hot things that
we know that they're trying to put get
people excited about owning private
assets or so various alternatives etc.
non vanilla things. In your perspective,
for most clients that you see, is there
like a compelling reason for some of
these novel products or for some of to
include like, yeah, private credit,
private assets, private whatever it is,
do these solve problems for the
portfolio manager or for the investment
adviser that the existing publicly uh
liquid assets don't provide? Yeah, 2022
messed a lot of people up because when
stocks and bonds become highly
correlated and you own that 6040
portfolio that you know the bonds go
down 15% or whatever and the stocks also
go down 25%. Well, then you look at your
portfolio at the end of the year and you
say, "Well, I don't own I don't I'm not
actually diversified." If you were that
retiree that you mentioned, Tracy, that
is retiring that year, you feel like you
made a bad decision. even though the
60/40 portfolio for the most part is a
pretty good portfolio. And so there's
this there is an increasingly compelling
argument in that context for things like
alternatives. I I mean me personally, I
tend to just sort of default towards
simple is better because I think that
this whole process can get so complex so
quickly that the little things you can
do to create organization and structure
to simplify it as best as possible is
going to result in a better process, a
better outcome in the long run. So, you
know, little things like I mean, God, I
woke up 10 years ago and I looked at me
and my wife's financial accounts and I
was like, "Oh my god, we've got I've got
a mar an old Meil Lynch 401k and I've
got you've got old Fidelity 401ks and
you've got, you know, a bank account
over there. I have a bank account over
here. We've got three brokerage accounts
at Charles Schwab and, you know,
different custodians, TDI trade or
whatever it might be." And I was like,
"This is I can't manage all this. I've
actually forgotten the password to some
of these accounts or something. And so
collapsing all this down and
consolidating it and simplifying it and
trying to own you know something that is
very very simple. I one of the
portfolios I talk about is the bogalhead
three fund portfolio in the book and I
think one of the reasons that so many
people love that and those the followers
of that portfolio they're very almost
militant about it. And I think in part
because it is so simple that it is it's
just beautifully sort of elegant in its
simplicity and but then you could get
into debates about is it too simple.
>> What is it the bogohead three
>> it's basically the bond aggregate and
then and you can mix this up you know in
different slices based on your risk
profile but it's three funds. It's a
domestic equity fund a foreign equity
fund and a bond aggregate. And these
investors will buy this and they'll buy
it for you know it costs like three
basis points or something in total. And
so it follows like all the sort of like
Taylor Laramore was the founder of it
and Taylor was um he's someone I
interviewed in the book and he's not he
wasn't really in the financial advisory
business but what he he became great
friends with Bogle over the years
because he was just emailing with him.
He had a actually a funny backstory
where he uh he comes back from World War
II and he fought in the Battle of the
Bulge and jumped out of airplanes and
had all these cool stories about it. But
he uh he comes back and I guess he
married like the hottest woman in Miami
or something and she was a model and
she's making crazy crazy amounts of
money modeling and so he comes into all
this money and he doesn't know what to
do with it and he hires a financial
adviser who hoses him and he starts
emailing John Bogle and Bogle then
starts telling him like nah you should
be doing this this and this. They become
great great friends. uh Bogle ultimately
crowns him the king of the bogle heads
later in life. And so he's kind of like
the most famous of all the Bogleheads
now and but he distilled all of Bogle's
thought processes down into like the
simplest of all possible portfolios
which is this famous three fund
portfolio. But it's arguably I I am
minorly critical of it because I I would
say that to some degree there is such a
thing as too simple also where for
instance like if you own the three fund
portfolio in 2022 you probably wish you
owned some of the T- bill and chill
portfolio or maybe you wish you owned
you know something completely
uncorrelated like the trend following
portfolio or something you know that
added a little bit of diversification
that kept you you know helped you sort
of stay the course as Bogle would say.
Um, I really enjoyed the Warren Buffett
portfolio chapter in part because it
demonstrates how people get decision
paralysis around all of this. So, even
if you're trying to replicate Warren
Buffett's investment style, you come up
with three different ways to do it,
right? So, it just seems like an
infinite way to invest. But the thing I
want to ask you is you also say that you
wrote to Warren Buffett and you actually
got a response.
>> What did he say?
>> Um,
>> this was like before you wrote the book
early in your was in my early 20s when
uh I was too poor to own a share of
Berkshire. So in order to go to the
shareholder meeting, you had to be a
shareholder and I was too poor to own a
share of Berkshire back then. So I I
wrote him a letter and I I said, "Hey,
could I come to the conference even
though I'm this poor schmuck who can't
even afford to buy your shares?" And I
get a typewritten letter on it comes in
like a you know probably a 5x6
little piece of paper and it's
typewritten and it was from his
assistant on behalf of him but he wrote
and invited me and I really was awesome.
I I had a a family event. I ended up not
going which was I've never been so
terrible decision but
>> I uh I went once and it's it was a
fantastic experience. It was extremely
cool. Yeah,
>> we should do an odd thoughts from
>> Well, he's done every time. Oh, yeah.
>> There's not going to be I mean,
>> I guess there'll probably still be one,
but it's not going to be the same.
>> Yeah, you guys should definitely do an
odd lots with one.
>> That would be very Can you introduce us
since you're corresponding?
>> I do remember I came
>> Do you have a typewriter?
>> Uh, no, but I can find one.
>> Cullen Ro, really fun. Thanks for coming
in studio. Congrats on the new book.
Let's stay in touch and really enjoyed
chatting with you.
>> Thanks for talking. It was great being
here. Absolutely. That was a lot of fun.
Tracy, have you ever have you heard of
the fintech uh startup Acorn? Is that
right?
>> Yeah, that's the one where you like
invest tiny bits of like years ago loose
change basically.
>> Yeah. So years ago, like I think
actually probably about 10 years ago or
nine years ago or something like that, I
read about it. I was like I was like
curious how it worked. So I like signed
up for an account and it like takes this
like small amount and also the app at
least I'm not trying to slag them. It
doesn't work very well. The p my
password is always getting resigned. But
every like year and a half I remember
that exists that has outperformed
every other investment because it's like
the one thing that I've like lost my
password to and I can't access it.
>> Oh, seriously?
>> Yeah. Yeah. It's done great.
>> What did you actually invest in? Like
>> it's just Yeah, it's like their growth
whatever their growth fund is. It's not
very much, but god like that one thing
where it's just like the one I think
about and look at absolutely the least
because I could never open the app and
then every once in a while I go through
the effort to reset the password has
done very well.
>> Well, this is like this is the entire
irony, right? We talk about how there's
no such thing as passive investing, but
actually if you just forget the password
to your account and never look at it,
you tend to outperform
>> you come close.
>> Yeah.
>> Um I really I just find this to be uh
such a fascinating topic. It does feel
like again it feels a little unsexy
because people are so interested in the
incredible amounts of money that people
have made in crypto and AI etc. But like
the puzzle of like putting it all
together and how you find assets that
make money across cycles but are
sufficiently uncorrelated etc. It's like
an interesting intellectual exercise,
>> right? And you also have this entire
industry that's built on the promise of
outperformance mostly and it feels
really difficult to uh resist I guess
the mostly masculine urge to outperform.
>> Um I like your uh your question in the
beginning because it's something I've
always thought of like about actually
assessing risk profile because
>> as Cullen put it, everyone knows the
right answer. Oh, I'd buy and hold. But
I just I've always been skeptical that
anyone is a good judge of their own risk
profile. So to hear him talk about no,
let's not talk about it like that. Let's
math it out. Let's talk about asset
liabilities. Let's talk about the
predictability of your income stream,
how that is a de facto fixed income
asset strikes me as a much more sort of
sound way to think about it than to sort
of psych yourself, try to imagine how
you're going to behave the next time a
pandemic.
>> Well, it also gets back to what we were
talking about in the intro, right? which
is you can say I'm going to buy the dip
if there's a 40% draw down. But chances
are a 40% draw down is happening in a
very bad economy where you might lose
your job and not have that much to
actually buy stuff with.
>> No, like March 2020 it felt like the
world was ending. Who wants to buy like
the Colin used the word rational which
is I think exactly right like it feels
rational.
Everyone should be selling at this time.
It's very hard very hard to actually
adhere to sort of like simple rules.
Yeah. Shall we leave it there?
>> Let's leave it there.
>> This has been another episode of the All
Thoughts Podcast. I'm Tracy Aloway. You
can follow me at Tracy Aloway.
>> And I'm Joe Weisenthal. You can follow
me at the stalwart. Follow our guest
Colin Ro. He's cullen roach. And of
course, check out his new book, Your
Perfect Portfolio. Follow our producers,
Kerman Rodriguez at Kerman Arman, Dash
Obennett at Dashbot, and Kale Brooks at
Kalebrooks.
>> And for more OddLots content, you should
definitely check out our daily
newsletter that is at
bloomberg.com/odlotss.
And if you want to chat about all these
topics, join our Discord, discord.ggods.
>> And if you enjoyed this conversation, if
you want to build your perfect portfolio
and tell us about it, then please leave
a comment or like the video, or better
yet, subscribe.
>> Thanks for watching.